---
layout: post
title: "Setting up TPM2 for a LUKS2-encrypted root partition"
date: 2021-09-06T00:48:43+01:00
draft: false
tag:
  - linux
  - Tech
---

## The problem (please don't get into a keyboard group buy)

I was _mildly_ content with entering my LUKS2 password every time I have to
reboot my computer. Even though it is quite a complicated password, I got
used to it; moreover, I rarely restarted anyway (at most once a day for
important updates). However, I am facing a possibility of going without a
keyboard for some days to some weeks (Nutshell: I ordered a custom keyboard
kit and it's on a boat somewhere, I had to gift my current keyboard before I
get the kit delivered because the recipient is leaving the country). As I
planned on using my laptop as a keyboard (using
[Barrier](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Barrier)), I knew for sure any
setup wouldn't work if I am prompted for a decryption password.

## Enabling autologin

First, I had to disable the lightdm greeter. I run i3 as a wm on top of
lightdm, and it is superfluous to login that way, keyboard or no keyboard.
Because we love privacy and we practice good opsec, I plan to turn it on once I
reunite with a working keyboard for an extra layer of security which will
prevent cold boot attacks (alternatively, use the key for the lock on my room).

To enable autologin in `/etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf`, these two lines need to be
present under the `[Seat]` option:

```conf
# /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf

[Seat:*]
autologin-user=<username>
autologin-user-timeout=0
```

After that, the group `autologin` needs to be created, and the autologin user
added to it. In the shell:

```bash
$ sudo gpasswd -a lckdscl autologin
$ sudo groupadd -r autologin
```

The default session must also be set in `~/.dmrc`. For me, it contains just the
one line saying `Session=i3`. Once all of that is done, then autologin is good
to go.

## The Arch wiki knows everything

Did you know if I set a keyword shortcut on Librewolf to search the Arch wiki?

Anyhow, I looked through many guides for enabling TPM2 for Linux, and
unsurprisingly, nothing beats the information from
[this](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Trusted_Platform_Module#systemd-cryptenroll)
Arch wiki page. I needed to install `tpm2-tools`, `tpm2-tss`, `tpm2-abrmd`.
Then `systemd-cryptenroll` recognised my TPM2 device right away. I recommend
reading the wiki.

The information around adding kernel options so that systemd can mount root
after the decryption step is a bit confusing (in other news, brainlet got
filtered), so I went with making a `/etc/crypttab.initramfs` file instead.
Essentially, we just want the path to be decrypted and which TPM device to use.
Here's mine:

```
# /etc/crypttab.initramfs
root	/dev/vgcrypt/cryptroot	-	tpm2-device=auto
```

## What about secure boot? Put a condom on.

I only registered to PCR0, which means TMP works if my BIOS signature is not
modified. Since my kernel and bootloader, and kernel modules are not signed,
I cannot use a PCR slot greater than that. Enabling secure boot would be a
pain with some dkms modules. Maybe one day I will sit down and enable secure
boot if I feel like it. With a kernel that implements rolling updates, I doubt I ever will get around to do this.

## Goodbye Plymouth

With TPM2 unlocking my drive pleasantly, I didn't have the need for `plymouth`
and its themes. Plymouth is a package that adds a nice intermediary theme
instead of the boot information the kernel spits out in the tty before X kicks
in. I set the kernel on low verbosity and enable quiet options, so once the
computer turns on, I just have to wait about 20s until I can finally connect my
laptop to my desktop and type from there instead. Problem solved.
