---
layout: post
title: "SSG virginity taken by Hugo"
date: 2021-08-25T17:43:50+01:00
tags: tech
---

## Babby's first time

At the time of writing, I am an amateur when it comes to
making websites. I can write, I can type, my Markdown game
is strong, but I let software do their thing to output
nice html pages (or other markup languages). I know enough
html from school to edit headers and footers, and finding
a solution that works fast and hassle-free is important.

## Difficulties

### Theming

So far, my experience with Hugo has been...alright. I found a nice theme called
"cactus", and while it worked when served locally for testing, it did not work
when deployed (even just testing it locally by opening index.html), the css
files were getting sourced and everything, but the website would not render any
css. I found opened issues on Github saying that neither the css nor the html
templates are valid (like damn, if you're going to produce a compliant web
template, spend the extra 5 seconds to put it through a validator). It's
strange that it worked for their demo and also my local host.

What I liked most about cactus was that it natively supported MathJax, while
other themes mostly relied on Katex. Now, Katex has a painfully annoying syntax that unnecessarily strays far from Latex format. I don't want to go through and edit all my notes just to conform to some themes. So I looked for a solution.

### MathJax support

After reading several articles and implementing their solutions, it seems like
all I had to do is to make a copy of the themes' partial templates and paste in
some JS that pulls in a MathJax CDN. However, somehow a lot of the solutions
just outright did not work. After a while, I finally found one that did, and
this opened a lot of doors for me; I can choose any theme I want! If you're
desperately wanting to go down that path, look it up and find the latest guide.
Don't forget add `mathjax:true` in your markdown front matter. Apparently,
there's also [this](https://github.com/peaceiris/hugo-mod-mathjax), but right
now, I have a working solution.

## Outcome

I landed on a theme called Archie, an extremely minimal but functional theme
  that utilises monospace fonts. I'm not sure if I will stick to Hugo, but I
  have to admit, it is fast. The only reason I would change is if there's a
  solution that is less bloated and have documentations and guides that
  actually work, or at least don't break with time.
