---
layout: post
title: "Keybinding discoveries in Neovim"
date: 2021-07-24 16:14:00
draft: false
tags:
  - tech
  - list
  - writing
---

_Updated on 24/08/2021_

## Current experience & self-promises

Originally, I wanted to make a custom cheatsheet with all my neovim bindings,
but that would be a lot of work since I have many plugins with their own
defaults, so I thought maybe I should spend the time doing _actual_ productive
work. Well, I stuck to this pattern after all, the best way to maintain a good
ecosystem that caters to my own personal use is to let it evolve as you
continuously use it, and of course, the most important thing, discovering new things.

For example, after constantly forcing myself to look up different ways to
navigate a file without going jjj or kkkk or whatever repetitive motions you
would normally do, I'm a much better vim user now. I still occasionally reach
for the mouse, and I know there are plugins like hop or lightspeed that could
rectify this, but here's a hot take, it's faster if I just move my damn mouse
in those moments of fumbling. If I have enough vim-fu power at the time, I
would've done a search for the keyword I want to jump to, or do `:<line number>`, which doesn't take much brain juice at all. I also learned paragraph
motions, like `vip` and text-object motions, like `ci{`, and in-line motions
such as e, b, f, t, and their upper case variants.

## The leader key crisis

I assigned `;` to `:` a while ago, but my pinky didn't appreciate it, so I
moved to `<space>`. But what about the leader key? At first it was actually
`<space>`, but it was too clunky, then it was `<comma>`, or `<period>`, or
back to the default backslash. Then I settled on comma. It was more ergonomic
than the period key, and definitely a lot more comfortable than the
backslash. I also used `,.` as leader for a while, but I realised I use
leader quite frequently and it wasn't working out.

## Escape from Insert

While I have remapped in QMK the escape key to the Caps Lock key, since I don't
use Caps Lock at all, I also want a different way to hit escape, because with
Caps Lock, my pinky is still working hard. The solution was to remap in insert
`jk`, but this means if I want to type j, there's a delay because vim wants to
wait if I execute k in a time defined by `timeoutlen`. But fortunately, I found
a plugin called [Better Escape](https://github.com/jdhao/better-escape.vim) and
while it is not written in Lua, but good ol' vimscript, it works beautifully.

## Recently learned things

- `<C-A>` to increment number under cursor and `<C-X>` to decrement number
  under cursor. This is great, because it doesn't matter if my cursor isn't
  under the number, Vim will automatically jump to the nearest number.
- `:123,345s/<from>/<to>/g` will do search and replace for those lines
- `J` to append next line to current line, can be dotted repeated however many
  lines with `[n].`. I actually use this a lot and it's very useful.
- `<C-o>` to enter normal mode only and re-enter insert mode after one
  movement. I use this semi often, but only when I notice I can do it.

## Going forward

Obviously, I won't be updating this if I learn new things, I found momentary
bliss when I discovered these keybindings that is a boost to my QOL. While I
might not be doing a lot of editing since it's University summer break. I know
I will be spending a lot of time on it when the semester starts. There are many
good tutorials and blogs that go in depth into Vimscript and niche Vim
bindings, but there is a beauty in letting problems arise, getting frustrated
and finding or putting together an elegant solution (usually in the form of
macros). It might not be a painless path, but the satisfaction and speed is
definitely worth it.

## Dotfiles

Link on [Github](https://github.com/mstcl/dotfiles/)
and alternatively,
[Codeberg](https://codeberg.org/lckdscl/dotfiles/)
