---
layout: post
title: "I'm switching off"
date: 2022-04-04 07:56:00 0000
tag:
  - tech
  - privacy
---

I am so. fucking. tired. of. phone applications. Everything requires an app
  nowadays. Yes, there exist parallel ways of accessing the same services such
  as through a browser or a phone call, but this pluralism doesn't apply
  everywhere. I'm mildly glad choices are still abundant so that I can often
  pick options that do _not_ require downloading some bloated shit, but I do
  often end up compromising for a price.

Small example to illustrate: I needed a taxi early morning to catch a coach
somewhere. Now, Uber is not good for your privacy, even though they take cash,
it often gives you the best price. About 6 months ago I could install Uber on
my phone and use it just fine, and this was on a de-Googled custom ROM that
only runs Micro-G (lets you access GMS while spoofing your device ID). I set up
a work profile with Micro-G which is logged into my old Google account, keeping
my default profile untouched by the Big Brothers.

Fast forward to now. I installed Uber through Play Store on this work profile
and it won't load pass this white screen. Was it my DNS? I turned that off;
still wouldn't work. Well, what about if I clone Uber to my default profile, no
luck. So I am barred from ordering a fucking taxi, most likely due to my
device's being built to protect my own privacy. Begrudgingly, I will just book
one over the phone on the day but it's beer money gone.

All the C\*VID-related shenanigans also require this app and that app.
Honestly, I'm just glad the health service in my country allows you to still
own offline digital copies of your vaccination records.

The day our pluralism of digital access ends and it all becomes applications
after applications (storage is cheap, they say as their selling point), is the
day I will forego my smartphone.

The idea of having a "dumb phone" sounds more and more attractive as the
internet and technology get more and more dystopian. Long gone are the days of
building and fixing your own devices and understanding what they do without
much nonsense going on behind the scene. To be fair, while I do prefer to own a
small computer on the go, it's mostly because I don't own a camera, nor a music
player, nor big physical maps.

But looking forward, I think I won't upgrade my current device. I will use it
until the battery gives out and lasts for a minute at a time. It will be a way
for me to communicate and call my family and loved ones who live abroad and
perform various other small tasks. But I want to try to leave it mostly at home
in the near future.

To do this, I will need a camera that I can bring to places so that I can take
pictures easily. This will be taken with me not every day but on planned trips.
It doesn't have to be fancy. I will also need to carry a map of the city to
places I haven't been to, or simply ask around. Lastly, and probably most
importantly, I would rather spend the money for a new phone on a good offline
music player. I already own a collection on my desktop. There is no excuse
paying for streaming if you're cool and poor like me.

I might not be able to use two SIM cards,
but will have return to my old one that gets spammed frequently. Regardless, I
need a plan that doesn't provide mobile data, because I won't need it. For
other tasks, I can still use my laptop. Finally, like many big changes, it's
important to understand I don't have to do all of this _permanently_ it's an
experiment and I can and will be able to find a good compromise.
